title: Optical Character Recognition (OCR)
author: Marina Samuel

## Introduction

What if your computer could wash your dishes, do your laundry, cook you dinner,
and clean your home? I think I can safely say that most people would be happy
to get a helping hand! But what would it take for a computer to be able to
perform these tasks, in exactly the same way that humans can? 

The famous computer scientist Alan Turing proposed the Turing Test as a way to
identify whether a machine could have intelligence indistinguishable from that
of a human being. The test involves a human posing questions to two hidden
entities, one human, and the other a machine, and trying to identify which is
which. If the interrogator is unable to identify the machine, then the machine
is considered to have human-level intelligence. 

While there is a lot of controversy surrounding whether the Turing Test is a
valid assessment of intelligence, and whether we can build such intelligent
machines, there is no doubt that machines with some degree of intelligence
already exist. There is currently software that helps robots navigate an office
and perform small tasks, or help those suffering with Alzheimer's. More common
examples of Artificial Intelligence (A.I.) are the way that Google estimates
what you’re looking for when you search for some keywords, or the way that
Facebook decides what to put in your news feed.

One well known application of A.I. is Optical Character Recognition (OCR). An
OCR system is a piece of software that can take images of handwritten
characters as input and interpret them into machine readable text.  While you
may not think twice when depositing a handwritten cheque into a bank machine
that confirms the deposit value, there is some interesting work going on in the
background. This chapter will examine a working example of a simple OCR system
that recognizes numerical digits using an Artificial Neural Network (ANN). But
first, let’s establish a bit more context.


## What is Artificial Intelligence?

